I'm Corinne Lapointe, Investigating Officer
with WorkSafeBC. Before you start a job, make
sure a hazard assessment and a job plan have
been done. That didn't happen at this well
site - instead the workers improvised. Things
went terribly wrong.
A truck driver arrived with a load of concrete
barriers. He'd been told that there would
be a picker truck for offloading, but there
wasn't one.
Instead, just before the truck arrived an
excavator operator on the site was directed
by his supervisor to offload using this excavator.
With no proper lifting attachment on site,
the two workers improvised with what was on
hand. The truck driver had some tie-down chains
so he rigged them above the excavator bucket
and around the two grooves beneath a barrier.
When the excavator lifted the barrier, one
chain slipped out of its groove. The truck
driver waved to the excavator operator to
stop and to lower the load so he could reposition
the chains.
The operator couldn't hear what the driver
was saying, so with the load suspended, he
engaged the safety lockout lever. This disabled
the operating controls, preventing the excavator
and boom from moving. He then exited his cab
and talked to the driver.
As the operator climbed back into the excavator,
his pant leg snagged the safety lockout lever,
releasing it. This enabled the controls. His
left pocket then snagged a joystick.
The excavator's boom suddenly swung. The
barrier glanced off the driver's chest,
dipped down and then struck his lower leg,
knocking him off the flat-deck.
The barrier then slipped from the chains and
crashed onto the flat-deck. This accident
didn't have to happen.
Safety activities must be coordinated on multiple-employer
worksites. Here, the work among the different
employers was not coordinated.
The pre-job planning was inadequate. Employers
must perform a risk assessment, identify hazards,
and implement safe work procedures. Don't
start a job until the proper equipment and
procedures are in place.
The supervision was also inadequate. Supervisors
must inform workers of hazards and regularly
check that workers are doing their jobs safely.
Although an excavator can be used to lift
barriers, a picker truck or forklift provides
better control.
With a picker truck or excavator, use an engineered
lifting device. Most precast concrete suppliers
have specialized barrier lifts available for
loan.
Never leave the controls of lifting equipment
while a load is suspended. And keep a safe
distance from the load.
The driver's leg was fractured so badly
that part of it had to be amputated. Don't
improvise. Plan ahead and stay safe.